
*15 June 2014*

> One of the most critical tasks a project manager will undertake is estimating budgets. This is critical because task estimation will set the project scope, define the resources that need to be allocated for the project, and impact the proposed project schedule.

*Here are some tips to make estimating easier.*

` Principle #1: Account for Unknowns `
   
- It is impossible to accurately predict everything that might happen during a project task. There is always going to be the chance for an unexpected event to increase the time needed for a task. Consider adding a small amount of time on top of your estimate to account for this. 

` Principle #2: Break the Task into Parts `

  - When thinking about a task for a project, break it down into pieces. Do not estimate the whole, just the parts. For example, say you are estimating the Drupal theming task for a modest web site (Drupal is a content management system). You might break this task down into splicing up the mock-up from the designer, creating the CSS and HTML, setting up the template files,and programming the views and blocks.

`Principle #3: A Task is More Than Development `

- This idea might seem simple, but it is worth mentioning: the time to complete a task is only partly developer time. Do not forget about additional time for quality assurance (QA), meetings with the developer to discuss the technical specification, time to collect feedback from the client or internal stakeholders, and time to deploy the project to a staging server (and, if relevant,a production server).

` Principle #4: Ask a Developer (But Add Time) `

- If you are estimating a task that you have not actually done in your past
work life, stop. Find a developer in the office, provide a simple summary of
the task (describe the task generically, but do mention any parts of the task
that you consider to be challenging, difficult, or nonstandard work), and ask
them how long it would take.

> *Now, take their estimate and add 50%, along with their developer bias (see
> Principle #5 ).
> Wait, why should you add 50%? Because a developer is likely to estimate
> how long it will take them to sit down and knock the task out. They do not
> tend to think about the several rounds of refinements they are likely to do,
> nor do they think to include general project management and quality assurance
> time for a task. All of the time spent beyond what they do is likely to
> be a mystery to them, and so it simply will not appear in the estimate.*

`Principle #5: Know Your Bias (or, Review YourActuals) `

- Providing good estimates for projects is an ongoing learning experience. It is
important to take a moment at the end of a project phase, or at the end of
a project, and check how long a task actually took. Compare the actual
time the task took to complete with your original estimate. A pattern—or
bias—will quickly emerge. You will likely be consistently incorrect in one
manner or another, be that too high or, more typically, too low in your estimates.
Once you start to see your bias, be proactive and adjust your initial estimate
by enough to counteract it. For example, if you think a task is going to
take 3 days, and you typically underestimate by 50%, then estimate the task
as 6 days.

`Principle #6: Use Software to Help Report on `

- Your Estimation Performance
There are many different project management software vendors. Several of
them (see the Appendix) include reports that can detail the estimation accuracy
history of individual team members. This makes it easy to track realtime
data on estimation bias, which will help improve your estimates.

`Principle #7: Resist the Temptation to Underestimate `

- There are many reasons why a project manager might feel pressure to
compress an estimate. This pressure could come from a client with a restricted
budget or a superior unwilling to allocate resources sufficient to
complete the project.
Resist this temptation. Compressed estimates greatly risk project success
and client happiness. A task takes a set time to complete. It does not
take less or more; it takes the time it takes. Having a tighter budget
means that the project manager will feel pressured to complete the task in
less time. This pressure gets passed to the developer. Nobody likes to work
under this kind of pressure.
An underestimated task will deliver pain to either the client or your superiors:
if you complete the task to spec, the client will be happy but your
project will be over budget. If you cut corners, the client will be (justifiably)
unhappy.
Insist that if less time has to be spent on a task, then features have to be
removed from the task requirements. Reducing the time spent should reduce
the scope accordingly. This way, you can complete the task on budget
and meet the expectations of the client.
